Getting Started Contributing
============================
:date: Sun Feb  9 10:39:25 PST 2014

My friend `@stemstep`_ recently posed a question on twitter asking::

    How do I get involved in open source?

I thought I'd write down some suggestions gleaned from my experience
contributing to open source projects.

1. Take Ownership

Tell yourself you're a contributor to the project of your choice.

This can also be thought of as *Fake It Till You Make It* or a
*Self-Fullfilling Prophecy*. Don't worry about asking "How can I help?"
or "What would you like me to do?". Just tell yourself you're a
contributor and you'll be one.

.. note: This doesn't mean you don't have to put the work in still.

The truth is most project contributors don't have the time or skill to
invest in mentoring or delegating tasks. Most of them have full time
jobs and other priorities. They contribute because they're passionate
about the software, and use it regularly.

2. Provide Support

The most useful contributor is the one who builds community.

Most open source project are run by a small team of volunteers who have
a limited supply of time. Few find time to invest in walking through
support requests and holding user's hands.

Any support you provide to a projects users will put you in a good light
for the users and the leadership.

3. Document **ALL** the things!

The problem you just helped fix *will* come up again. Document it now;
if able, fix it.

The documentation is always lacking. Even if a project advertises 100%
API documentation coverage, their user documentation is still surly
lacking.

The best approach I've found to this is to create a *NOTES* file in the
root of the project, or have a scratchpad next to your keyboard where
you jot down notes.

4. Set aside Time

Time scheduled is time saved.

Life is full of distractions. That time you've been looking for, you
know that time you "don't have" to hack on the projects you want? It
will be found in that hour you spent on Facebook, Reddit, or HackerNews. 

When you schedule time to work on projects, you will find that time
magically appearing. It can be as little as 30 minutes, or as much as a
weekend, just as long as you schedule it.

5. Scratch the Itch

Contributions happen because people want to solve problems.

.. _@stemstep: http://twitter.com/stemstep
